sl partner integration guide (#2640)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/guides/dbt-ecosystem/sl-partner-integration-guide.md

The dbt Semantic Layer is unopinionated about specific tools, use cases, or applications of data. The following summarizes some of the common use cases for the dbt Semantic Layer:

* BI, reporting, and analytics
* Data quality and monitoring
* Governance and privacy
* Data discovery and cataloging
* Machine learning and data science

<!-- rewrite below little and would like to see if i can include a button or callout -->

:::info Share your use case

To share other use cases for the dbt Semantic Layer, contact the [dbt Labs team](mailto:semantic-layer@dbtlabs.com).

:::

## Product overview

The dbt Semantic Layer product architecture includes four primary components:

| Components | Information | Developer plans | Team plans | Enterprise plans | License |
| --- | --- | :---: | :---: | :---: | --- |
| **[dbt Project](/docs/build/metrics)** | Define models and metrics in dbt Core. | ✅ | ✅ |  ✅  | Open source in dbt Core |
| **[dbt Server](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-server)**| A persisted HTTP server that wraps dbt Core to handle RESTful API requests for dbt operations. | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | BSL |

> | **SQL Proxy** | Reverse-proxy that accepts dbt-SQL (SQL + Jinja-like query models and metrics, use macros), compiles the query into pure SQL, executes the query in the data platform, and returns the data. | ✅ <br></br>_* Available during Public Preview only_ | ✅ | ✅ | Proprietary in dbt Cloud |

Author: do we need to add any link to the sql proxy ?

```suggestion
| **SQL Proxy** | Reverse-proxy that accepts dbt-SQL (SQL + Jinja-like query models and metrics, use macros), compiles the query into pure SQL, executes the query in the data platform, and returns the data. | ✅ <br></br>_* Available during Public Preview only_ | ✅ | ✅ | Proprietary in dbt Cloud |
```

Reviewer: No, there isn't additional info about it

- **Accessible**: Include a self-serve component so a data consumer can ask questions via the user interface (UI), if applicable.

## Use the Metadata API

To get started, you must meet the dbt Semantic Layer [prerequisites](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-semantic-layer#prerequisites). This section will explain how to connect to and query the [Metadata API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/metadata-api) for model and metric definitions.

**Metadata API authorization**

To learn how to authorize requests to the Metadata API, review the [documentation](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/metadata-querying#authorization) for more details. Metrics-specific queries work identically to existing Metadata API queries, so existing integrations used to fetch model metadata will work perfectly in the context of metrics. 

**Query the Metadata API**

Test out the Metadata API by using the [GraphQL sandbox](https://studio.apollographql.com/sandbox/explorer?endpoint=https%3A%2F%2Fmetadata.cloud.getdbt.com%2Fgraphql) and use this [Python client](https://github.com/transform-data/dbt-metadata-client) as a starting point to develop. 

### Fetch models for a project

> You can fetch and query models, or details about a specific model, for a project from a given job.

Author: @cafzal if fetch means query, can i just use one word for all? if so, which word is more appropriate (fetch or query)?

So for example, for the below - can i use write 'You can query models....'? otherwise, i wonder if it sounds redundant. this question applies to all content using fetch and query.

```suggestion
You can fetch and query models, or details about a specific model, for a project from a given job.
```

Reviewer: Good point @mirnawong1 we can change 'fetch' to 'query' for metadata API and consolidate. just want to be sure if we're framing it as follows to differentiate:
- if SL, it's querying model/metric _data_
- if metadata API, it's querying model/metric _definitions_ or _details_

| [Entities](#entities) | Early 2023 |
| [dbt Semantic Layer Connector](#dbt-semantic-layer-connector) | Early-mid 2023 |
| [dbt Semantic Layer API](#dbt-semantic-layer-api) | Mid 2023 |

### Entities 
<!-- rewrite a little and include a summary for each tab entry -->

dbt Labs will introduce a new node type, [the entity](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/6379) when dbt Core version 1.5 launches. It introduces a new and efficient way to define metrics by reusing logic (for example, `time_grains`).  Entities are semantic objects made up of curated dimensions from models with more metadata defined. Over time, users can standardize metric and entity definitions with packages to speed up development. 

For integrations, entities will provide information like:

- a way to organize metrics based on the entity they reference, and 
- a new consumable and dynamically generated dataset (versus finding a table in the data platform). 

This information will be available alongside the Metadata API and entities can be directly queried through the dbt Semantic Layer. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/semantic-layer/entity-lineage.jpg" title="Entity lineage graph" />

:::caution 🚧

> This is a work in progress and you can anticipate continuous improvements. 

Author: @callum-mcdata can i link to a place where users can stay up to date w entities? if so, is [this](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/6379) the link for that?

```suggestion
This is a work in progress and you can anticipate continuous improvements. 
```

Reviewer 2: @mirnawong1 yea that would be the best place for keeping up to date for now. In the future it might contain links to the suggested PR's once the code is in draft form.

## Use the Metadata API

To get started, you must meet the dbt Semantic Layer [prerequisites](/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-semantic-layer#prerequisites). This section will explain how to connect to and query the [Metadata API](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/metadata-api) for model and metric definitions.

**Metadata API authorization**

To learn how to authorize requests to the Metadata API, review the [documentation](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/metadata-querying#authorization) for more details. Metrics-specific queries work identically to existing Metadata API queries, so existing integrations used to fetch model metadata will work perfectly in the context of metrics. 

**Query the Metadata API**

Test out the Metadata API by using the [GraphQL sandbox](https://studio.apollographql.com/sandbox/explorer?endpoint=https%3A%2F%2Fmetadata.cloud.getdbt.com%2Fgraphql) and use this [Python client](https://github.com/transform-data/dbt-metadata-client) as a starting point to develop. 

### Fetch models for a project

You can fetch and query models, or details about a specific model, for a project from a given job.

<!--- tabs for listing models and fetching details about specific model --->
<Tabs>

> <TabItem value="list" label="Listing models">

Reviewer: Split this tab's contents:
- Listing models for a job
- Example response with models

                   "executionTime": 1.676571846008301
               },
               {
                   "runId": 105297555,
                   "uniqueId": "model.jaffle_shop.stg_orders",
                   "executionTime": 1.631831407546997
               }
           ]
       }
   }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<!--- End tabs for listing models and fetching details about specific model --->

### Fetch metrics for a project

Fetch and query metrics for a project from a given job. To fetch the full list of metrics defined in a user’s project via the dbt Cloud Metadata API, use the [metrics query](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/metadata-schema-metrics). Review the [dbt Metrics docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/metrics#available-properties) for information about the metric properties. 

Test out the API using the [GraphQL sandbox](https://studio.apollographql.com/sandbox/explorer?endpoint=https%3A%2F%2Fmetadata.cloud.getdbt.com%2Fgraphql). 

<!--- tabs for listing, fetching, example, and querying metrics --->
<Tabs>

<TabItem value="list" label="Listing metrics">

This is an example listing metrics from a given job.

```
{
  metrics(jobId: 123) {
    name
    label
    description

> 		model

Reviewer: Please correct indentation

		dependsOn
    calculation_method
    expression
    timestamp
		timeGrains
    dimensions
		window
    filters
    tags
    meta
  }
}
```
</TabItem>

<TabItem value="fetch" label="Fetch details about a specific metric">

As a note, all metric properties shown displayed above are supported in this `metric` query, however, an abbreviated query is used here as an example.

This is an example of fetching details about a specific metric `new_customers` from a given job `123`.

```
{
  metric(jobId: 123) {
    label
    calculation_method
    timestamp
    timeGrains
    dimensions
  }
}
```

</TabItem>

> <TabItem value="example" label="Example metric definition">

Reviewer: Move this to the final tab

```
metrics:
  - name: total_claim_charges
    label: Total Claim Charges
    model: ref('fct_billed_patient_claims')
    calculation_method: sum
    expression: total_charge_amount
    timestamp: created_at
    time_grains: [day, week, month, all_time]

  - name: total_billed_diagnoses
    label: Total Billed Diagnoses
    model: ref('fct_billed_patient_claims')
    calculation_method: count_distinct
    expression: diagnosis_id
    timestamp: created_at
    time_grains: [day, week, month]
```

</TabItem>

> <TabItem value="queryapi" label="Query the Metadata API for metrics">

Reviewer: Delete this, duplicative

When the dbt Semantic Layer is configured, dbt Cloud provides a Proxy Server endpoint that users can connect to as though it's a Snowflake-hosted endpoint. When queries are submitted, dbt Cloud will:

1. Compile dbt-sql queries into valid Snowflake SQL
2. Execute that compiled SQL against the Snowflake data platform
3. Return the results to the client

Replace the hostname in your existing Snowflake connection with the relevant dbt Cloud Proxy Server URL (for example, `abc123.proxy.cloud.getdbt.com`), and all queries you submit through the endpoint will be compiled en route to the data platform. 

_Note: This approach will change with the new Semantic Layer connection, which will be able to query all data platforms supported in dbt Cloud via dedicated JDBC/ODBC drivers (and eventually an API)._

<!--- tabs for running models and running metrics --->
<Tabs>

<TabItem value="models" label="Model queries">

Model queries allow users to query models and use macros from their dbt project.

```
select cents_to_dollars('amount_cents') as amount_dollars 
from {{ ref('orders') }}
```
</TabItem>

> <TabItem value="metrics" label="Metric queries">

Reviewer: Can we put this tab first? Metric queries is more common use case

---
title: "dbt Semantic Layer integration" 
id: "sl-partner-integration-guide"
description: Learn about partner integration guidelines, roadmap, and connectivity. 
---

# dbt Semantic Layer partner integration

:::info Contact us

This guide is for dbt Semantic Layer integration partners and explains integration guidelines, product roadmap, and connectivity.<br />

To become a formal partner, integrate with the API, or have questions/feedback &mdash; **[contact us](mailto:semantic-layer@dbtlabs.com)** for more info.

:::

## Overview

> The dbt Semantic Layer allows users to dynamically generate and query datasets in downstream tools based on their dbt governed assets, such as metrics, models, and entities. It helps organizations manage complexities such as data, tools, and teams to make more efficient and trustworthy decisions.

Reviewer 3: I love this intro

> The rapid growth of different tools in the modern data stack has helped data professionals. The various tools help solve the diverse needs of different teams. The downside of this growth is the fragmentation of business logic across teams, tools, and workloads. 

Reviewer 3: This is a great problem statement. What if we simplify it a little and combine the first two sentences? Something like:
```suggestion
The rapid growth of different tools in the modern data stack has helped data professionals address the diverse needs of different teams. The downside of this growth is the fragmentation of business logic across teams, tools, and workloads. 
```

To solve this, the dbt Semantic Layer provides a platform where users can confidently leverage their data from within their tools. dbt Cloud's change management capabilities ensure that any user modifications made to core business constructs, like metrics or entities, are distributed into all the tools connected to the data platform.

> The dbt Semantic Layer is unopinionated about specific tools, use cases, or applications of data. The following summarizes some of the common use cases:

Reviewer 3: I understand why we often use the word "opinionated" when discussing our software, but "unopinionated" is rather esoteric. A brief follow-up statement on why being unopinionated is beneficial to our Cloud users might be helpful.

Author: hey @callum-mcdata or @cafzal  not sure if have any insight on why the SL is unopinionated and why it's a good thing for users/partners?

Reviewer: Good catch; the current wording is awkward. @mirnawong1 How about replacing line 26 with "The dbt Semantic Layer can be used for a variety of tools and applications of data. Here are some common use cases:"

* Business intelligence (BI), reporting, and analytics,
* Data quality and monitoring,
* Governance and privacy,
* Data discovery and cataloging,
* Machine learning and data science.

<!-- rewrite below little and would like to see if i can include a button or callout -->

:::info Share your use case

If you'd like to share other use cases for the dbt Semantic Layer, contact the [dbt Labs team](mailto:semantic-layer@dbtlabs.com).

:::

## Product overview

The dbt Semantic Layer product architecture includes four primary components:

| Components | Information | Developer plans | Team plans | Enterprise plans | License |
| --- | --- | :---: | :---: | :---: | --- |

> | **[dbt Project](/docs/build/metrics)** | Define models and metrics in dbt Core. | ✅ | ✅ |  ✅  | Open source in dbt Core |

Reviewer 3: Should this be:
```suggestion
| **[dbt Metrics](/docs/build/metrics)** | Define models and metrics in dbt Core. | ✅ | ✅ |  ✅  | Open source in dbt Core |
```

Author: ah i think @azzam34 @callum-mcdata or @cafzal said this should be project. i can't remember who so tagging them to confirm for me.

Reviewer 2: We chose `projects` to emphasize that the Semantic Layer goes beyond metrics. We want users to query their models and view this as a consuming extension of their project.

  <div>
    <div>Test out the Metadata API by using the <a href="https://studio.apollographql.com/sandbox/explorer?endpoint=https%3A%2F%2Fmetadata.cloud.getdbt.com%2Fgraphql">GraphQL sandbox</a> and use this <a href="https://github.com/transform-data/dbt-metadata-client">Python client</a> as a starting point to develop.
    </div>
    </div>
    </details>
    <br></br>

<!-- the following content was used for the <details> portion above. leaving this here for legacy purposes 
**Metadata API authorization**

To learn how to authorize requests to the Metadata API, review the [documentation](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/metadata-querying#authorization) for more details. Metrics-specific queries work identically to existing Metadata API queries, so existing integrations used to query model metadata will work perfectly in the context of metrics. 

**Query the Metadata API**

Test out the Metadata API by using the [GraphQL sandbox](https://studio.apollographql.com/sandbox/explorer?endpoint=https%3A%2F%2Fmetadata.cloud.getdbt.com%2Fgraphql) and use this [Python client](https://github.com/transform-data/dbt-metadata-client) as a starting point to develop. 

-->

### Query models for a project

> You can query model definitions or details about a specific model, for a project from a given job.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can query model definitions or details about a specific model for a project from a given job.
```

 
<!--- tabs for listing models and fetching details about specific model --->
<Tabs>

<TabItem value="list" label="Listing models for a job">

> This is an example of querying all models that utilize the schema,`analytics` from a given job.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is an example of querying all models that utilize the schema`analytics` from a given job.
```

Author: good catch!

   database
   dbtVersion
   runGeneratedAt
   }
}
```
</TabItem>

<TabItem value="exampleresponse" label="Example response with models">

```
{
   "data": {
       "models": [
           {
               "name": "customers",
               "status": "success",
               "compileCompletedAt": "2022-12-15T06:37:24.186Z",
               "database": "analytics",
               "dbtVersion": "1.3.1",
               "runGeneratedAt": "2022-12-15T06:37:25.187Z"
           },
           {
               "name": "stg_customers",
               "status": "success",
               "compileCompletedAt": "2022-12-15T06:37:22.509Z",
               "database": "analytics",
               "dbtVersion": "1.3.1",
               "runGeneratedAt": "2022-12-15T06:37:25.187Z"
           },
           {
               "name": "stg_orders",
               "status": "success",
               "compileCompletedAt": "2022-12-15T06:37:22.509Z",
               "database": "analytics",
               "dbtVersion": "1.3.1",
               "runGeneratedAt": "2022-12-15T06:37:25.187Z"
           }
       ]
   }
}
```
</TabItem>

<TabItem value="details" label="Query details about a specific model">

> This is an example of querying details about a specific model, `model.jaffle_shop.customers` from a given job.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is an example of querying details about a specific model, `model.jaffle_shop.customers`, from a given job.
```

                   "executionTime": 1.676571846008301
               },
               {
                   "runId": 105297555,
                   "uniqueId": "model.jaffle_shop.stg_orders",
                   "executionTime": 1.631831407546997
               }
           ]
       }
   }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<!--- End tabs for listing models and fetching details about specific model --->

### Query metrics for a project

Query metrics definitions or details for a project from a given job and refer to the following resources: 

- [Metrics query](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/metadata-schema-metrics) &mdash; Information on how to query the full list of metrics defined in a user’s project with the dbt Cloud Metadata API. 
- [dbt Metrics docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/metrics#available-properties) &mdash; Information on the available metric properties. 
- [GraphQL sandbox](https://studio.apollographql.com/sandbox/explorer?endpoint=https%3A%2F%2Fmetadata.cloud.getdbt.com%2Fgraphql) &mdash; Access to test the dbt Cloud Metadata API testing environment.

<!--- tabs for listing, fetching, example, and querying metrics --->
<Tabs>

<TabItem value="list" label="Listing metrics">

> This is an example listing metrics from a given job.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is an example listing metrics from a given job:
```

```
{
  metrics(jobId: 123) {
    name
    label
    description
    model
    dependsOn
    calculation_method
    expression
    timestamp
    timeGrains
    dimensions
    window
    filters
    tags
    meta
  }
}
```
</TabItem>

<TabItem value="query" label="Query details about a specific metric">

> The `metric` query support all metric properties listed in **Listing metrics**, however, refer to the following abbreviated query as an example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `metric` query supports all metric properties listed in **Listing metrics**. 
The following abbreviated example is querying details about the metric `new_customers` from job `123`:
```

> This is an example of querying details about a specific metric `new_customers` from a given job `123`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: hey @matthewshaver keeping this bit here as it explains the query details as it relates to the code

> This is an example of querying details about a specific metric `new_customers` from a given job `123`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: same as above

    timestamp: created_at
    time_grains: [day, week, month, all_time]

  - name: total_billed_diagnoses
    label: Total Billed Diagnoses
    model: ref('fct_billed_patient_claims')
    calculation_method: count_distinct
    expression: diagnosis_id
    timestamp: created_at
    time_grains: [day, week, month]
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

<!--- End tabs for listing, fetching, example, and querying metrics --->

## Query the dbt Semantic Layer

This section explains how to connect to or query the dbt Semantic Layer Proxy Server to return model data, metric data, and so on. 

When you configure the dbt Semantic Layer, dbt Cloud provides a Proxy Server endpoint that users can connect to as though it's a Snowflake-hosted endpoint. Once the queries are submitted, dbt Cloud will:

1. Compile dbt-sql queries into valid Snowflake SQL,
2. Execute the compiled SQL against the Snowflake data platform,
3. Return the results to the client.

Replace the hostname in your existing data platform connection with the relevant dbt Cloud Proxy Server URL (for example, `abc123.proxy.cloud.getdbt.com`). All queries you submit through the endpoint will be compiled en route to the data platform.* 

> *_Note: This approach will change with the new Semantic Layer connection, which will be able to query all data platforms supported in dbt Cloud through dedicated JDBC/ODBC drivers, and eventually an API._

Reviewer 3: Is there a date we can include here?

Author: @cafzal i dont think there's a date yet right? or would we want to commit to one?

Author: mid 2023

<!--- tabs for running models and running metrics --->
<Tabs>

<TabItem value="metrics" label="Metric queries">

Users can compile and execute metric queries using macros defined in the [dbt-metrics package](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt_metrics).  This package:

> * Generates the SQL required to accurately calculate the metric definition,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Generates the SQL required to accurately calculate the metric definition,
```

> * Supplies helper macros for derived calculations (like month over month, year to date, and so on) time series operations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Supplies helper macros for derived calculations (like month over month, year to date, and so on) time series operations
```

> * Supplies helper macros for derived calculations (like month over month, year to date, and so on) time series operations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Supplies helper macros for derived calculations (like month over month, year to date, and so on) time series operations
```

      "created_at": 1669653027.290001
  },
  ```
</TabItem>

<TabItem value="entityquery" label="Entity queries">

Query an entity using dbt-SQL. Eventually, users will be able to query entities and dynamically generate datasets using a macro (like with metrics), without having to find specific tables or columns. 

```
select *
from {{ entities.calculate(
	entity_list=[...], [Required, one to start]
       dimensions: [...], [Optional, default is all]
       metrics: [...], [Optional, default is all at finest grain]
       filters: ...
	)}}
  ```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### dbt Semantic Layer Connector 

In order to support more data platforms and enhance the user experience, users will be able to connect to a [dbt Cloud-supported data platform](/docs/get-started/connect-your-database) with the dbt Semantic Layer. 

Integration partners need to install the [Arrow FlightSQL](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/FlightSql.html) JDBC/ODBC driver, which will authenticate with dbt Cloud and the data platform that it queries. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/semantic-layer/connection-architecture.jpg" title="Envisioned connection architecture" />

### dbt Semantic Layer API 

> dbt Cloud will provide a REST-based API that supports:

Reviewer 3: Do we mean RESTful here or is this a different approach simply based on REST?

Author: @cafzal you may know?

Author: changing to web api per cameron

## Contact us

[Reach out](mailto:semantic-layer@dbtlabs.com) to us if you:

- would like to become a formal partner, 
- have product feedback or questions, or 
- are interested in integrating, including via the API

<!-- rewrite a little and would like to see if i can include a button -->

## Related docs

- [dbt Semantic Layer docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/use-dbt-semantic-layer/dbt-semantic-layer) to learn about the product.
- [dbt Metrics docs](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/metrics) for more information about its components.
- [dbt Semantic Layer intro blog](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/dbt-semantic-layer/) and [launch blog](https://www.getdbt.com/blog/frontiers-of-the-dbt-semantic-layer/) to learn more about the product vision and purpose. 
- [dbt Semantic Layer integrations page](https://www.getdbt.com/product/semantic-layer-integrations) for information about the available partner integrations.

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer 3: Will this be finished by publication date?

Author: removed it
